What Is A Blog? The Essential Guide For Beginners
By
Nicola Bleu
Updated on
July 13, 2024
What Is A Blog
Blogging has been around for years and it has infiltrated all areas of the internet. But still many people fail to understand what a blog is and how reading one can have an impact on their lives.

This guide aims to demystify blogging for those of you who are complete beginners. We’ll cover exactly what a blog is, essential structures and even which platforms you can get started on.

So, what is a blog? Let’s take a look at the fundamentals:

What is a blog?
The most common definition of a blog goes as follows:

A regularly updated website or web page, typically one run by an individual or small group, that is written in an informal or conversational style.

But what this doesn’t tell you is that a blog is like an online journal with information appearing in reverse chronological order. The information in a blog is usually written in posts which are updates posted at intervals. This is much like how you would write a diary entry in intervals.

Fun fact: Blogs began like journal entries where people shared updates about their life online.

The information in blog posts varies depending on what the blog is about, which is what we’ll cover in the next section.

What do you do with a blog?
What you can do with a blog is an important question. The serious answer is that you can do almost anything with a blog.

A blog can be:

Daily updates about your life
Regular posts about a topic you’re interested
Regular examples of the work you do
Insights about a particular industry
Educational guides and tutorials about one or more subjects
Product reviews (possibly monetized with affiliate links)
What you do with a blog is entirely based on your personal preferences. Some people like to keep their blog a personal experience. While others use it as a platform to grow their own brand and earn an income.

When it comes to the main purpose of a blog, it can be a place to connect you to a certain group of people or audience.

A blog can also increase your traffic and send people (leads) to your site. More importantly, it helps you show your authority in a field of interest or niche and build your brand.

What’s the difference between a blog and a website?
Funnel Overload and Venngage blog and website comparison
Example: Funnel Overload left (blog) and Venngage right (website)

Sometimes it’s not easy to differentiate between a blog and a website. Especially since more businesses are integrating blogs into their websites to reach more people.  What’s more, with the advent of smarter design tools, blogs can look a lot like a website and vice versa.

But the fact is, blogs differ from websites because they need frequent updates. A good example of this in action is a food blog that posts cooking recipes. Or a music blog that posts frequent music reviews. It could even be a business posting updates with industry news and developments.

The thing is, blogs drive reader engagement. People can comment (usually), interact and voice their concerns for others to read.

A blog is dynamic with many moving parts that change often, whereas a website is static. The content on a website rarely changes and readers don’t have much of an opportunity to interact.

The elements that define a blog include but are not limited to:

Publish dates
Categories and tags
Author bylines
Reader comments
Yet, static websites rarely have any of these elements. If you visit a website, things won’t be any different from day to the next. But a blog will always have something new to offer readers (providing the owners publish new content, of course.)

Popular blogging platforms
Since we’re talking about what a blog is, it’s important to discuss blogging platforms. You’ll need to look into these to create a blog.

Blogging platforms are also known as Content Management Systems (CMS). They’re usually software or services you use to publish your content on the internet.

Many of these platforms are free to use, while others you need to pay a premium for. Here are 4 of the most popular blog platforms used today.

WordPress
Wordpress What Is A Blog
WordPress is one of the most popular Content Management Systems used worldwide. Plus it powers over 30% of websites on the internet. There are two ways to use WordPress;

com: a for-profit blogging service hosted on WordPress servers, with premium paid-for upgrades for more features. The content you post here is owned by the platform and monetization options are limited.
org: the free open source version of WordPress, which you can install on your own hosting servers, where you 100% own your own content (self-hosted).
Self-hosting your own WordPress blog is a great option if you want to have full control over the entire look and performance of your blog. With WordPress, you can publish almost any type of content from text posts, videos, mp3s and much more.

There is a large repertoire of templates you can use to customise how your blog looks to your readers. These are also known as themes, and there are plenty of free themes you can use.

WordPress also has thousands of plugins which are like add-ons for your blog that adds extra functionality. Learn more in our post on must-have WordPress plugins.

Ghost
Ghost What Is A Blog
Ghost is a non-profit, open-source blogging platform aimed at powering blogs and online magazines. It’s a text-focused platform, with less functionality for making complicated websites. Think of Ghost as a lighter, simpler alternative to WordPress.

To use Ghost you either need to host the software on your own server or pay a subscription fee for Ghost Pro. Ghost Pro hosts your blog on their managed infrastructure. It also automates much of the setup process, meaning you can get started with your blog much faster.

Blogger
Blogger What Is A Blog
Blogger is a free blogging platform powered by Google. The combination of a free platform and the flexibility offered makes it a popular choice for new bloggers. There are plenty of designs and layouts to make your blog look good and it’s connected to many of Google’s other services.

What you may not realise, is that if you use this platform, your content won’t belong to you. In fact, it will be owned by Google. And chances are that one day you could try to log in to your blog and find that your access is denied.

So, if you’re serious about running and growing a blog, I wouldn’t recommend Blogger. Years of hard work could suddenly go up in smoke.

Squarespace
Squarespace What Is A Blog
Squarespace is an all-in-one website builder for sites and blogs of all kinds. It bills itself as a viable WordPress alternative. And in terms of style and structure, it is, but it lacks the full flexibility and the control you get with WordPress.
It does a great job of offering stylish and beautiful templates to make your site look great. It also integrates with Social Media, Email Marketing Services and the use of your own domain name.
Squarespace is a hosted service, so ownership of the content you publish is not your own. In fact, it exerts control over almost every other aspect of your site, from how to style it, to how you can export your data.
Understanding blog structure
Most blogs have a lot in common when it comes to how they are set up. The layout is often similar across blogs and the content flows top-down with the most recent updates appearing at the top of the page.
Let’s take a look at the average blog structure in greater detail.
Homepage
A blogs homepage can either be a feed of recent blog posts or a static page built of various modules.
Usually, the homepage will begin with a header area. This is where the blog logo, blog name and tagline will display. Alongside this will be the blog’s menu bar, where readers can navigate to different pages and sections.
Blogging Wizard layout on the homepage
After is the main content area. A homepage with a recent article feed will show a list of blog posts with a headline, image, date and author for each.
e at Blogging Wizard, Nicola runs Your Creative Aura where she teaches people how to write music. Nicola has the rare ability to take inspiration from the most mundane objects and turn it into catchy, and memorable lyrics. And, she is rather fond of penguins.